<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-33" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIII</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:drama">
					<table>
						<tbody>
							<tr>
								<td/>
								<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span>‚ÄîFlower of warriors,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>How is‚Äôt with Titus Lartius?</span>
									</p>
								</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Marcius</td>
								<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span>As with a man busied about decrees,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Condemning some to death and some to exile,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Ransoming him or pitying, threatening the other.</span>
									</p>
								</td>
							</tr>
						</tbody>
					</table>
					<cite>
						<i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Coriolanus</i>
					</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>The captive Abbot‚Äôs features and manners exhibited a whimsical mixture of offended pride, and deranged foppery and bodily terror.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhy, how now, my masters?‚Äù said he, with a voice in which all three emotions were blended. ‚ÄúWhat order is this among ye? Be ye Turks or Christians, that handle a churchman?‚ÅÝ‚ÄîKnow ye what it is, <i xml:lang="la">manus imponere in servos Domini</i>? Ye have plundered my mails‚ÅÝ‚Äîtorn my cope of curious cut lace, which might have served a cardinal!‚ÅÝ‚ÄîAnother in my place would have been at his <i xml:lang="la">excommunicabo vos</i>; but I am placible, and if ye order forth my palfreys, release my brethren, and restore my mails, tell down with all speed an hundred crowns to be expended in masses at the high altar of Jorvaulx Abbey, and make your vow to eat no venison until next <span epub:type="z3998:event">Pentecost</span>, it may be you shall hear little more of this mad frolic.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHoly Father,‚Äù said the chief Outlaw, ‚Äúit grieves me to think that you have met with such usage from any of my followers, as calls for your fatherly reprehension.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúUsage!‚Äù echoed the priest, encouraged by the mild tone of the silvan leader; ‚Äúit were usage fit for no hound of good race‚ÅÝ‚Äîmuch less for a Christian‚ÅÝ‚Äîfar less for a priest‚ÅÝ‚Äîand least of all for the Prior of the holy community of Jorvaulx. Here is a profane and drunken minstrel, called Allan-a-Dale‚ÅÝ‚Äî<i xml:lang="la">nebulo quidam</i>‚ÅÝ‚Äîwho has menaced me with corporal punishment‚ÅÝ‚Äînay, with death itself, an I pay not down four hundred crowns of ransom, to the boot of all the treasure he hath already robbed me of‚ÅÝ‚Äîgold chains and gymmal rings to an unknown value; besides what is broken and spoiled among their rude hands, such as my pouncer-box and silver crisping-tongs.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt is impossible that Allan-a-Dale can have thus treated a man of your reverend bearing,‚Äù replied the Captain.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt is true as the gospel of Saint Nicodemus,‚Äù said the Prior; ‚Äúhe swore, with many a cruel north-country oath, that he would hang me up on the highest tree in the greenwood.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDid he so in very deed? Nay, then, reverend father, I think you had better comply with his demands‚ÅÝ‚Äîfor Allan-a-Dale is the very man to abide by his word when he has so pledged it.‚Äù<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-43" id="noteref-43" epub:type="noteref">43</a></p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou do but jest with me,‚Äù said the astounded Prior, with a forced laugh; ‚Äúand I love a good jest with all my heart. But, ha! ha! ha! when the mirth has lasted the livelong night, it is time to be grave in the morning.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnd I am as grave as a father confessor,‚Äù replied the Outlaw; ‚Äúyou must pay a round ransom, Sir Prior, or your convent is likely to be called to a new election; for your place will know you no more.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAre ye Christians,‚Äù said the Prior, ‚Äúand hold this language to a churchman?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúChristians! ay, marry are we, and have divinity among us to boot,‚Äù answered the Outlaw. ‚ÄúLet our buxom chaplain stand forth, and expound to this reverend father the texts which concern this matter.‚Äù</p>
			<p>The Friar, half-drunk, half-sober, had huddled a friar‚Äôs frock over his green cassock, and now summoning together whatever scraps of learning he had acquired by rote in former days, ‚ÄúHoly father,‚Äù said he, ‚Äú<i xml:lang="la">Deus faciat salvam benignitatem vestram</i>‚ÅÝ‚ÄîYou are welcome to the greenwood.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat profane mummery is this?‚Äù said the Prior. ‚ÄúFriend, if thou be‚Äôst indeed of the church, it were a better deed to show me how I may escape from these men‚Äôs hands, than to stand ducking and grinning here like a morris-dancer.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúTruly, reverend father,‚Äù said the Friar, ‚ÄúI know but one mode in which thou mayst escape. This is Saint Andrew‚Äôs day with us, we are taking our tithes.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut not of the church, then, I trust, my good brother?‚Äù said the Prior.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOf church and lay,‚Äù said the Friar; ‚Äúand therefore, Sir Prior <i xml:lang="la">facite vobis amicos de Mammone iniquitatis</i>‚ÅÝ‚Äîmake yourselves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, for no other friendship is like to serve your turn.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI love a jolly woodsman at heart,‚Äù said the Prior, softening his tone; ‚Äúcome, ye must not deal too hard with me‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI can well of woodcraft, and can wind a horn clear and lustily, and hollow till every oak rings again‚ÅÝ‚ÄîCome, ye must not deal too hard with me.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúGive him a horn,‚Äù said the Outlaw; ‚Äúwe will prove the skill he boasts of.‚Äù</p>
			<p>The Prior Aymer winded a blast accordingly. The Captain shook his head.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSir Prior,‚Äù he said, ‚Äúthou blowest a merry note, but it may not ransom thee‚ÅÝ‚Äîwe cannot afford, as the legend on a good knight‚Äôs shield hath it, to set thee free for a blast. Moreover, I have found thee‚ÅÝ‚Äîthou art one of those, who, with new <span epub:type="z3998:nationality">French</span> graces and Tra-li-ras, disturb the ancient <span epub:type="z3998:nationality">English</span> bugle notes.‚ÅÝ‚ÄîPrior, that last flourish on the recheat hath added fifty crowns to thy ransom, for corrupting the true old manly blasts of venerie.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell, friend,‚Äù said the Abbot, peevishly, ‚Äúthou art ill to please with thy woodcraft. I pray thee be more conformable in this matter of my ransom. At a word‚ÅÝ‚Äîsince I must needs, for once, hold a candle to the devil‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhat ransom am I to pay for walking on Watling-street, without having fifty men at my back?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWere it not well,‚Äù said the Lieutenant of the gang apart to the Captain, ‚Äúthat the Prior should name the Jew‚Äôs ransom, and the Jew name the Prior‚Äôs?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThou art a mad knave,‚Äù said the Captain, ‚Äúbut thy plan transcends!‚ÅÝ‚ÄîHere, Jew, step forth‚ÅÝ‚ÄîLook at that holy Father Aymer, Prior of the rich Abbey of Jorvaulx, and tell us at what ransom we should hold him?‚ÅÝ‚ÄîThou knowest the income of his convent, I warrant thee.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúO, assuredly,‚Äù said Isaac. ‚ÄúI have trafficked with the good fathers, and bought wheat and barley, and fruits of the earth, and also much wool. O, it is a rich abbey-stede, and they do live upon the fat, and drink the sweet wines upon the lees, these good fathers of Jorvaulx. Ah, if an outcast like me had such a home to go to, and such incomings by the year and by the month, I would pay much gold and silver to redeem my captivity.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHound of a Jew!‚Äù exclaimed the Prior, ‚Äúno one knows better than thy own cursed self, that our holy house of God is indebted for the finishing of our chancel‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnd for the storing of your cellars in the last season with the due allowance of Gascon wine,‚Äù interrupted the Jew; ‚Äúbut that‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat is small matters.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHear the infidel dog!‚Äù said the churchman; ‚Äúhe jangles as if our holy community did come under debts for the wines we have a license to drink, <i xml:lang="la">propter necessitatem, et ad frigus depellendum</i>. The circumcised villain blasphemeth the holy church, and Christian men listen and rebuke him not!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAll this helps nothing,‚Äù said the leader.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúIsaac, pronounce what he may pay, without flaying both hide and hair.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAn six hundred crowns,‚Äù said Isaac, ‚Äúthe good Prior might well pay to your honoured valours, and never sit less soft in his stall.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSix hundred crowns,‚Äù said the leader, gravely; ‚ÄúI am contented‚ÅÝ‚Äîthou hast well spoken, Isaac‚ÅÝ‚Äîsix hundred crowns.‚ÅÝ‚ÄîIt is a sentence, Sir Prior.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúA sentence!‚ÅÝ‚Äîa sentence!‚Äù exclaimed the band; ‚ÄúSolomon had not done it better.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThou hearest thy doom, Prior,‚Äù said the leader.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYe are mad, my masters,‚Äù said the Prior; ‚Äúwhere am I to find such a sum? If I sell the very pyx and candlesticks on the altar at Jorvaulx, I shall scarce raise the half; and it will be necessary for that purpose that I go to Jorvaulx myself; ye may retain as borrows<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-44" id="noteref-44" epub:type="noteref">44</a> my two priests.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat will be but blind trust,‚Äù said the Outlaw; ‚Äúwe will retain thee, Prior, and send them to fetch thy ransom. Thou shalt not want a cup of wine and a collop of venison the while; and if thou lovest woodcraft, thou shalt see such as your north country never witnessed.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOr, if so please you,‚Äù said Isaac, willing to curry favour with the outlaws, ‚ÄúI can send to <span epub:type="z3998:place">York</span> for the six hundred crowns, out of certain monies in my hands, if so be that the most reverend Prior present will grant me a quittance.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHe shall grant thee whatever thou dost list, Isaac,‚Äù said the Captain; ‚Äúand thou shalt lay down the redemption money for Prior Aymer as well as for thyself.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúFor myself! ah, courageous sirs,‚Äù said the Jew, ‚ÄúI am a broken and impoverished man; a beggar‚Äôs staff must be my portion through life, supposing I were to pay you fifty crowns.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThe Prior shall judge of that matter,‚Äù replied the Captain.‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúHow say you, Father Aymer? Can the Jew afford a good ransom?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúCan he afford a ransom?‚Äù answered the Prior ‚ÄúIs he not Isaac of <span epub:type="z3998:place">York</span>, rich enough to redeem the captivity of the ten tribes of <span epub:type="z3998:place">Israel</span>, who were led into Assyrian bondage?‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI have seen but little of him myself, but our cellarer and treasurer have dealt largely with him, and report says that his house at <span epub:type="z3998:place">York</span> is so full of gold and silver as is a shame in any Christian land. Marvel it is to all living Christian hearts that such gnawing adders should be suffered to eat into the bowels of the state, and even of the holy church herself, with foul usuries and extortions.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHold, father,‚Äù said the Jew, ‚Äúmitigate and assuage your choler. I pray of your reverence to remember that I force my monies upon no one. But when churchman and layman, prince and prior, knight and priest, come knocking to Isaac‚Äôs door, they borrow not his shekels with these uncivil terms. It is then, Friend Isaac, will you pleasure us in this matter, and our day shall be truly kept, so God sa‚Äô me?‚ÅÝ‚Äîand Kind Isaac, if ever you served man, show yourself a friend in this need! And when the day comes, and I ask my own, then what hear I but Damned Jew, and the curse of <span epub:type="z3998:place">Egypt</span> on your tribe, and all that may stir up the rude and uncivil populace against poor strangers!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúPrior,‚Äù said the Captain, ‚ÄúJew though he be, he hath in this spoken well. Do thou, therefore, name his ransom, as he named thine, without farther rude terms.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNone but <i xml:lang="la">latro famosus</i>‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe interpretation whereof,‚Äù said the Prior, ‚Äúwill I give at some other time and tide‚ÅÝ‚Äîwould place a Christian prelate and an unbaptized Jew upon the same bench. But since ye require me to put a price upon this caitiff, I tell you openly that ye will wrong yourselves if you take from him a penny under a thousand crowns.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúA sentence!‚ÅÝ‚Äîa sentence!‚Äù exclaimed the chief Outlaw.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúA sentence!‚ÅÝ‚Äîa sentence!‚Äù shouted his assessors; ‚Äúthe Christian has shown his good nurture, and dealt with us more generously than the Jew.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThe God of my fathers help me!‚Äù said the Jew; ‚Äúwill ye bear to the ground an impoverished creature?‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI am this day childless, and will ye deprive me of the means of livelihood?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThou wilt have the less to provide for, Jew, if thou art childless,‚Äù said Aymer.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAlas! my lord,‚Äù said Isaac, ‚Äúyour law permits you not to know how the child of our bosom is entwined with the strings of our heart‚ÅÝ‚ÄîO Rebecca! laughter of my beloved Rachel! were each leaf on that tree a zecchin, and each zecchin mine own, all that mass of wealth would I give to know whether thou art alive, and escaped the hands of the Nazarene!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWas not thy daughter dark-haired?‚Äù said one of the outlaws; ‚Äúand wore she not a veil of twisted sendal, broidered with silver?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúShe did!‚ÅÝ‚Äîshe did!‚Äù said the old man, trembling with eagerness, as formerly with fear. ‚ÄúThe blessing of Jacob be upon thee! canst thou tell me aught of her safety?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt was she, then,‚Äù said the yeoman, ‚Äúwho was carried off by the proud Templar, when he broke through our ranks on yester-even. I had drawn my bow to send a shaft after him, but spared him even for the sake of the damsel, who I feared might take harm from the arrow.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh!‚Äù answered the Jew, ‚ÄúI would to God thou hadst shot, though the arrow had pierced her bosom!‚ÅÝ‚ÄîBetter the tomb of her fathers than the dishonourable couch of the licentious and savage Templar. Ichabod! Ichabod! the glory hath departed from my house!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúFriends,‚Äù said the Chief, looking round, ‚Äúthe old man is but a Jew, natheless his grief touches me.‚ÅÝ‚ÄîDeal uprightly with us, Isaac‚ÅÝ‚Äîwill paying this ransom of a thousand crowns leave thee altogether penniless?‚Äù</p>
			<p>Isaac, recalled to think of his worldly goods, the love of which, by dint of inveterate habit, contended even with his parental affection, grew pale, stammered, and could not deny there might be some small surplus.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell‚ÅÝ‚Äîgo to‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhat though there be,‚Äù said the Outlaw, ‚Äúwe will not reckon with thee too closely. Without treasure thou mayst as well hope to redeem thy child from the clutches of Sir Brian de Bois-Guilbert, as to shoot a stag-royal with a headless shaft.‚ÅÝ‚ÄîWe will take thee at the same ransom with Prior Aymer, or rather at one hundred crowns lower, which hundred crowns shall be mine own peculiar loss, and not light upon this worshipful community; and so we shall avoid the heinous offence of rating a Jew merchant as high as a Christian prelate, and thou wilt have six hundred crowns remaining to treat for thy daughter‚Äôs ransom. Templars love the glitter of silver shekels as well as the sparkle of black eyes.‚ÅÝ‚ÄîHasten to make thy crowns chink in the ear of De Bois-Guilbert, ere worse comes of it. Thou wilt find him, as our scouts have brought notice, at the next Preceptory house of his Order.‚ÅÝ‚ÄîSaid I well, my merry mates?‚Äù</p>
			<p>The yeomen expressed their wonted acquiescence in their leader‚Äôs opinion; and Isaac, relieved of one half of his apprehensions, by learning that his daughter lived, and might possibly be ransomed, threw himself at the feet of the generous Outlaw, and, rubbing his beard against his buskins, sought to kiss the hem of his green cassock. The Captain drew himself back, and extricated himself from the Jew‚Äôs grasp, not without some marks of contempt.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNay, beshrew thee, man, up with thee! I am <span epub:type="z3998:nationality">English</span> born, and love no such Eastern prostrations‚ÅÝ‚ÄîKneel to God, and not to a poor sinner, like me.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAy, Jew,‚Äù said Prior Aymer; ‚Äúkneel to God, as represented in the servant of his altar, and who knows, with thy sincere repentance and due gifts to the shrine of Saint Robert, what grace thou mayst acquire for thyself and thy daughter Rebecca? I grieve for the maiden, for she is of fair and comely countenance‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI beheld her in the lists of <span epub:type="z3998:place">Ashby</span>. Also Brian de Bois-Guilbert is one with whom I may do much‚ÅÝ‚Äîbethink thee how thou mayst deserve my good word with him.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAlas! alas!‚Äù said the Jew, ‚Äúon every hand the spoilers arise against me‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI am given as a prey unto the Assyrian, and a prey unto him of <span epub:type="z3998:place">Egypt</span>.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnd what else should be the lot of thy accursed race?‚Äù answered the Prior; ‚Äúfor what saith holy writ, <i xml:lang="la">verbum Domini projecerunt, et sapientia est nulla in eis</i>‚ÅÝ‚Äîthey have cast forth the word of the Lord, and there is no wisdom in them; <i xml:lang="la">propterea dabo mulieres eorum exteris</i>‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI will give their women to strangers, that is to the Templar, as in the present matter; <i xml:lang="la">et thesauros eorum haeredibus alienis</i>, and their treasures to others‚ÅÝ‚Äîas in the present case to these honest gentlemen.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Isaac groaned deeply, and began to wring his hands, and to relapse into his state of desolation and despair. But the leader of the yeomen led him aside.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAdvise thee well, Isaac,‚Äù said Locksley, ‚Äúwhat thou wilt do in this matter; my counsel to thee is to make a friend of this churchman. He is vain, Isaac, and he is covetous; at least he needs money to supply his profusion. Thou canst easily gratify his greed; for think not that I am blinded by thy pretexts of poverty. I am intimately acquainted, Isaac, with the very iron chest in which thou dost keep thy moneybags‚ÅÝ‚ÄîWhat! know I not the great stone beneath the apple-tree, that leads into the vaulted chamber under thy garden at <span epub:type="z3998:place">York</span>?‚Äù The Jew grew as pale as death‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúBut fear nothing from me,‚Äù continued the yeoman, ‚Äúfor we are of old acquainted. Dost thou not remember the sick yeoman whom thy fair daughter Rebecca redeemed from the gyves at <span epub:type="z3998:place">York</span>, and kept him in thy house till his health was restored, when thou didst dismiss him recovered, and with a piece of money?‚ÅÝ‚ÄîUsurer as thou art, thou didst never place coin at better interest than that poor silver mark, for it has this day saved thee five hundred crowns.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnd thou art he whom we called Diccon Bend-the-Bow?‚Äù said Isaac; ‚ÄúI thought ever I knew the accent of thy voice.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI am Bend-the-Bow,‚Äù said the Captain, ‚Äúand Locksley, and have a good name besides all these.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut thou art mistaken, good Bend-the-Bow, concerning that same vaulted apartment. So help me Heaven, as there is nought in it but some merchandises which I will gladly part with to you‚ÅÝ‚Äîone hundred yards of Lincoln green to make doublets to thy men, and a hundred staves of <span epub:type="z3998:nationality">Spanish</span> yew to make bows, and a hundred silken bowstrings, tough, round, and sound‚ÅÝ‚Äîthese will I send thee for thy goodwill, honest Diccon, an thou wilt keep silence about the vault, my good Diccon.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSilent as a dormouse,‚Äù said the Outlaw; ‚Äúand never trust me but I am grieved for thy daughter. But I may not help it‚ÅÝ‚ÄîThe Templars lances are too strong for my archery in the open field‚ÅÝ‚Äîthey would scatter us like dust. Had I but known it was Rebecca when she was borne off, something might have been done; but now thou must needs proceed by policy. Come, shall I treat for thee with the Prior?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIn God‚Äôs name, Diccon, an thou canst, aid me to recover the child of my bosom!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDo not thou interrupt me with thine ill-timed avarice,‚Äù said the Outlaw, ‚Äúand I will deal with him in thy behalf.‚Äù</p>
			<p>He then turned from the Jew, who followed him, however, as closely as his shadow.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúPrior Aymer,‚Äù said the Captain, ‚Äúcome apart with me under this tree. Men say thou dost love wine, and a lady‚Äôs smile, better than beseems thy Order, Sir Priest; but with that I have nought to do. I have heard, too, thou dost love a brace of good dogs and a fleet horse, and it may well be that, loving things which are costly to come by, thou hatest not a purse of gold. But I have never heard that thou didst love oppression or cruelty.‚ÅÝ‚ÄîNow, here is Isaac willing to give thee the means of pleasure and pastime in a bag containing one hundred marks of silver, if thy intercession with thine ally the Templar shall avail to procure the freedom of his daughter.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIn safety and honour, as when taken from me,‚Äù said the Jew, ‚Äúotherwise it is no bargain.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúPeace, Isaac,‚Äù said the Outlaw, ‚Äúor I give up thine interest.‚ÅÝ‚ÄîWhat say you to this my purpose, Prior Aymer?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThe matter,‚Äù quoth the Prior, ‚Äúis of a mixed condition; for, if I do a good deal on the one hand, yet, on the other, it goeth to the vantage of a Jew, and in so much is against my conscience. Yet, if the <span epub:type="z3998:nationality">Israelite</span> will advantage the Church by giving me somewhat over to the building of our dortour,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-45" id="noteref-45" epub:type="noteref">45</a> I will take it on my conscience to aid him in the matter of his daughter.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúFor a score of marks to the dortour,‚Äù said the Outlaw‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúBe still, I say, Isaac!‚ÅÝ‚Äîor for a brace of silver candlesticks to the altar, we will not stand with you.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNay, but, good Diccon Bend-the-Bow‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äîsaid Isaac, endeavouring to interpose.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúGood Jew‚ÅÝ‚Äîgood beast‚ÅÝ‚Äîgood earthworm!‚Äù said the yeoman, losing patience; ‚Äúan thou dost go on to put thy filthy lucre in the balance with thy daughter‚Äôs life and honour, by Heaven, I will strip thee of every maravedi thou hast in the world, before three days are out!‚Äù</p>
			<p>Isaac shrunk together, and was silent.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnd what pledge am I to have for all this?‚Äù said the Prior.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhen Isaac returns successful through your mediation,‚Äù said the Outlaw, ‚ÄúI swear by Saint Hubert, I will see that he pays thee the money in good silver, or I will reckon with him for it in such sort, he had better have paid twenty such sums.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell then, Jew,‚Äù said Aymer, ‚Äúsince I must needs meddle in this matter, let me have the use of thy writing-tablets‚ÅÝ‚Äîthough, hold‚ÅÝ‚Äîrather than use thy pen, I would fast for twenty-four hours, and where shall I find one?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIf your holy scruples can dispense with using the Jew‚Äôs tablets, for the pen I can find a remedy,‚Äù said the yeoman; and, bending his bow, he aimed his shaft at a wild-goose which was soaring over their heads, the advanced-guard of a phalanx of his tribe, which were winging their way to the distant and solitary fens of Holderness. The bird came fluttering down, transfixed with the arrow.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThere, Prior,‚Äù said the Captain, ‚Äúare quills enow to supply all the monks of Jorvaulx for the next hundred years, an they take not to writing chronicles.‚Äù</p>
			<p>The Prior sat down, and at great leisure indited an epistle to Brian de Bois-Guilbert, and having carefully sealed up the tablets, delivered them to the Jew, saying, ‚ÄúThis will be thy safe-conduct to the Preceptory of Templestowe, and, as I think, is most likely to accomplish the delivery of thy daughter, if it be well backed with proffers of advantage and commodity at thine own hand; for, trust me well, the good Knight Bois-Guilbert is of their confraternity that do nought for nought.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell, Prior,‚Äù said the Outlaw, ‚ÄúI will detain thee no longer here than to give the Jew a quittance for the six hundred crowns at which thy ransom is fixed‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI accept of him for my paymaster; and if I hear that ye boggle at allowing him in his accompts the sum so paid by him, Saint Mary refuse me, an I burn not the abbey over thine head, though I hang ten years the sooner!‚Äù</p>
			<p>With a much worse grace than that wherewith he had penned the letter to Bois-Guilbert, the Prior wrote an acquittance, discharging Isaac of <span epub:type="z3998:place">York</span> of six hundred crowns, advanced to him in his need for acquittal of his ransom, and faithfully promising to hold true compt with him for that sum.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnd now,‚Äù said Prior Aymer, ‚ÄúI will pray you of restitution of my mules and palfreys, and the freedom of the reverend brethren attending upon me, and also of the gymmal rings, jewels, and fair vestures, of which I have been despoiled, having now satisfied you for my ransom as a true prisoner.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúTouching your brethren, Sir Prior,‚Äù said Locksley, ‚Äúthey shall have present freedom, it were unjust to detain them; touching your horses and mules, they shall also be restored, with such spending-money as may enable you to reach <span epub:type="z3998:place">York</span>, for it were cruel to deprive you of the means of journeying.‚ÅÝ‚ÄîBut as concerning rings, jewels, chains, and what else, you must understand that we are men of tender consciences, and will not yield to a venerable man like yourself, who should be dead to the vanities of this life, the strong temptation to break the rule of his foundation, by wearing rings, chains, or other vain gauds.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThink what you do, my masters,‚Äù said the Prior, ‚Äúere you put your hand on the Church‚Äôs patrimony‚ÅÝ‚ÄîThese things are <i xml:lang="la">inter res sacras</i>, and I wot not what judgment might ensue were they to be handled by laical hands.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI will take care of that, reverend Prior,‚Äù said the Hermit of <span epub:type="z3998:place">Copmanhurst</span>; ‚Äúfor I will wear them myself.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúFriend, or brother,‚Äù said the Prior, in answer to this solution of his doubts, ‚Äúif thou hast really taken religious orders, I pray thee to look how thou wilt answer to thine official for the share thou hast taken in this day‚Äôs work.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúFriend Prior,‚Äù returned the Hermit, ‚Äúyou are to know that I belong to a little diocese, where I am my own diocesan, and care as little for the Bishop of <span epub:type="z3998:place">York</span> as I do for the Abbot of Jorvaulx, the Prior, and all the convent.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThou art utterly irregular,‚Äù said the Prior; ‚Äúone of those disorderly men, who, taking on them the sacred character without due cause, profane the holy rites, and endanger the souls of those who take counsel at their hands; <i xml:lang="la">lapides pro pane condonantes iis</i>, giving them stones instead of bread as the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Vulgate</i> hath it.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNay,‚Äù said the Friar, ‚Äúan my brainpan could have been broken by Latin, it had not held so long together.‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI say, that easing a world of such misproud priests as thou art of their jewels and their gimcracks, is a lawful spoiling of the <span epub:type="z3998:nationality">Egyptians</span>.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThou be‚Äôst a hedge-priest,‚Äù<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-46" id="noteref-46" epub:type="noteref">46</a> said the Prior, in great wrath, ‚Äú<i xml:lang="la">excommunicabo vos.</i>‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThou be‚Äôst thyself more like a thief and a heretic,‚Äù said the Friar, equally indignant; ‚ÄúI will pouch up no such affront before my parishioners, as thou thinkest it not shame to put upon me, although I be a reverend brother to thee. <i xml:lang="la">Ossa ejus perfringam</i>, I will break your bones, as the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Vulgate</i> hath it.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHola!‚Äù cried the Captain, ‚Äúcome the reverend brethren to such terms?‚ÅÝ‚ÄîKeep thine assurance of peace, Friar.‚ÅÝ‚ÄîPrior, an thou hast not made thy peace perfect with God, provoke the Friar no further.‚ÅÝ‚ÄîHermit, let the reverend father depart in peace, as a ransomed man.‚Äù</p>
			<p>The yeomen separated the incensed priests, who continued to raise their voices, vituperating each other in bad Latin, which the Prior delivered the more fluently, and the Hermit with the greater vehemence. The Prior at length recollected himself sufficiently to be aware that he was compromising his dignity, by squabbling with such a hedge-priest as the Outlaw‚Äôs chaplain, and being joined by his attendants, rode off with considerably less pomp, and in a much more apostolical condition, so far as worldly matters were concerned, than he had exhibited before this rencounter.</p>
			<p>It remained that the Jew should produce some security for the ransom which he was to pay on the Prior‚Äôs account, as well as upon his own. He gave, accordingly, an order sealed with his signet, to a brother of his tribe at <span epub:type="z3998:place">York</span>, requiring him to pay to the bearer the sum of a thousand crowns, and to deliver certain merchandises specified in the note.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúMy brother Sheva,‚Äù he said, groaning deeply, ‚Äúhath the key of my warehouses.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnd of the vaulted chamber,‚Äù whispered Locksley.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo, no‚ÅÝ‚Äîmay Heaven forefend!‚Äù said Isaac; ‚Äúevil is the hour that let anyone whomsoever into that secret!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt is safe with me,‚Äù said the Outlaw, ‚Äúso be that this thy scroll produce the sum therein nominated and set down.‚ÅÝ‚ÄîBut what now, Isaac? art dead? art stupefied? hath the payment of a thousand crowns put thy daughter‚Äôs peril out of thy mind?‚Äù</p>
			<p>The Jew started to his feet‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúNo, Diccon, no‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI will presently set forth.‚ÅÝ‚ÄîFarewell, thou whom I may not call good, and dare not and will not call evil.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Yet ere Isaac departed, the Outlaw Chief bestowed on him this parting advice:‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúBe liberal of thine offers, Isaac, and spare not thy purse for thy daughter‚Äôs safety. Credit me, that the gold thou shalt spare in her cause, will hereafter give thee as much agony as if it were poured molten down thy throat.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Isaac acquiesced with a deep groan, and set forth on his journey, accompanied by two tall foresters, who were to be his guides, and at the same time his guards, through the wood.</p>
			<p>The Black Knight, who had seen with no small interest these various proceedings, now took his leave of the Outlaw in turn; nor could he avoid expressing his surprise at having witnessed so much of civil policy amongst persons cast out from all the ordinary protection and influence of the laws.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúGood fruit, Sir Knight,‚Äù said the yeoman, ‚Äúwill sometimes grow on a sorry tree; and evil times are not always productive of evil alone and unmixed. Amongst those who are drawn into this lawless state, there are, doubtless, numbers who wish to exercise its license with some moderation, and some who regret, it may be, that they are obliged to follow such a trade at all.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnd to one of those,‚Äù said the Knight, ‚ÄúI am now, I presume, speaking?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSir Knight,‚Äù said the Outlaw, ‚Äúwe have each our secret. You are welcome to form your judgment of me, and I may use my conjectures touching you, though neither of our shafts may hit the mark they are shot at. But as I do not pray to be admitted into your mystery, be not offended that I preserve my own.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI crave pardon, brave Outlaw,‚Äù said the Knight, ‚Äúyour reproof is just. But it may be we shall meet hereafter with less of concealment on either side.‚ÅÝ‚ÄîMeanwhile we part friends, do we not?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThere is my hand upon it,‚Äù said Locksley; ‚Äúand I will call it the hand of a true Englishman, though an outlaw for the present.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnd there is mine in return,‚Äù said the Knight, ‚Äúand I hold it honoured by being clasped with yours. For he that does good, having the unlimited power to do evil, deserves praise not only for the good which he performs, but for the evil which he forbears. Fare thee well, gallant Outlaw!‚Äù Thus parted that fair fellowship; and He of the Fetterlock, mounting upon his strong warhorse, rode off through the forest.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
